Dr. Welch,

 

Here's my report for Activity 10 for this week:

Goals and objectives:
 
Use any and all means to do deep classification analysis
Identify prominent features that are highly correlated to having cancer
Make a prediction about what kind of cancer we are studying
Summary of results:
 
Using recursion, I was easily able to adjust my code to make deeper decision trees.
I identified 3 key features as highly correlated with this particular type of cancer: DOCK3, RNF43, and ACVR2A.
Based on some research, I hypothesize that this dataset contains samples with brain cancer.
Summary of methods:
I kept with the Phi Function as my decision tree metric, but one important change I made this week was that I modified my decision tree function to be recursive, that way I could achieve deeper trees. I ended up stopping the recursion once it gets a pure node or exceeds a depth of 5. Because of this, almost all of the decision trees are severely unbalanced and skewed to the right, but there are some occasional exceptions which do not get all pure nodes in the left child nodes.
Because of this change, I also had to modify my classifier to be recursive, which actually ended up making the code for it much simpler.
Then, I performed a modified version of 3-fold cross validation using random forests. I started like normal cross validation, splitting the set into 3 equally sized random groups. Then, I used groups 1 and 2 to build a deep random forest with 99 total trees. But before I started making the trees, I culled some of the less useful features from the data set. I wrote a function which took out any feature that had less than 3 samples, which allowed me to eliminate a great number of features which would otherwise be fairly useless, that way computation would be much faster. So, the random forest was built with a culled version of groups 1 and 2 with much fewer features, and each decision node selected from a random 1/3 of the remaining features in the dataset (that is the 'n' value from last week). I then classified group 3 using this random forest, as well as tracked which features appeared at the root nodes of all the trees. Finally, I performed the same operations but with the other two combinations of the groups to complete the 3-fold cross validation, which meant I made 297 (99*3) total decision trees. 
The culling of the features from the combined groups 1 and 2 gave me 188 features, groups 2 and 3 gave me 126 features, and groups 1 and 3 gave me only 88 features. This means that the n values for selecting n random features at a decision node were 62, 42, and 29 respectively.
Key results:
These are my results from the 3 different trials

This means that the average accuracy between the 3 trials is 72.22% and the most common mutation to split the root node are DOCK3 (42/297), RNF43 (31/297), ACVR2A (25/297), and ZBTB20 (21/297)
Discussion:
The deep random forest mixed with 3-fold cross validation produced the same results as using individual, depth 2 decision trees with 3-fold cross validation: both had about a 72% accuracy. This more or less checks out because in my testing, adding depth to the decision trees did very little to improve the accuracy. I think this is because there are only a handful of features which can effectively classify a large (8+) number of samples at one time. So, by the 3rd or 4th level, the best feature to classify with only manages to split 2 or 3 samples from the rest, whereas the root might have split 8 or 9.
In my research about what kind of cancer we may be studying, I came across ncbi's website: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/. The pages for DOCK3, RNF43, ACVR2A, and ZBTB20 proved to be illuminating for what kind of tissues these mutations most frequently occur in. The page is pretty dense are hard to understand, but the bar graph about 1/3 down the page was understandable enough for me to parse out some useful information. For DOCK3, the overwhelming majority of samples occurred in the brain, and a few occurred in the testis and thyroid. For RNF43, the bar graph is more evenly distributed, having peaks for the colon, duodenum, and small intestine, but only having a few samples in the brain. For ACVR2A, the samples are even more evenly distributed, with only a single spike for the skin, but still, it has a fair amount of samples from the brain. Finally, for ZBTB20, there are actually several spikes, and one of them is the brain tissue. Honestly, it is hard to tell a clear winner based on these four graphs, but DOCK3 has such an overwhelming majority of brain samples, that I think I am comfortable with guessing brain cancer for our dataset, even though none of the other ones seem to be particularly favored by brain tissue.
 
 
 
 
Thank you,

Ethan Dowalter
